Address minor comments from Lars (#24)
mirjak/draft-kuehlewind-shmoo-remote-fee: draft-ietf-shmoo-remote-fee.md

# Principle of open participation

This document outlines the principle of open participation that the IETF Administration LLC (IETF LLC)

> is expected to incoperate in decisions about registration fees for full online meetings.

Author: ```suggestion
is expected to incorporate in decisions about registration fees for full online meetings.
```

> is expected to incorporate in decisions about registration fees for full online meetings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is expected to incorporate into decisions about the registration fee structure for fully online meetings.
```

I'll note that there remain some internal inconsistencies int he document that need to be addressed, for example, the very next paragraph says "regardless of whether the meeting has a physical presence", which implies the principles intend to hybrid meetings, which as discussed on the list they can't (at least not at BCP-level strength.) And further down it says "if remote participation is provided, there should always be a free option", which has similar issues.

Author: I copied you comment to PR #21 to address there!

   documents, our WG mailing lists, our attendance lists, and our
   meeting minutes publicly available on the Internet."
   
While the principle in RFC3935 is explicitly noting that this principle includes a requirement to open 
basically all our documents and documentation and making them accessible over the Internet, it was
probably written with mainly having email interactions in mind when talking about participation.
This document extends this principle to explicitly cover online
participation at meetings. Particularly in this context, openness should be seen as open and free. 

> This document does not advise that all IETF meetings or related IETF events must have a remote participation option,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document does not stipulate that all IETF meetings or related IETF events must have a remote participation option,
```

because there could be technical or other reasons why that might not always be possible.
This document rather says that if remote participation is provided,
there should always be a free option to make the process as open as possible. Having said that,

> it is of course strongly anticipated that at least all working group sessions as well as BoFs

Reviewer 2: The Hackathon is part of the regular IETF meeting and is included in the main agenda of the IETF meeting. It was therefore covered by the previous text but not by this proposed change. I suggest adding it to the list if this change is made.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps
```
it is of course strongly anticipated that
all items on the main IETF agenda (working group sessions, BoFs, hackathon, etc)..
```

?

Reviewer 2: Yes, that works for me.

   documents, our WG mailing lists, our attendance lists, and our
   meeting minutes publicly available on the Internet."
   
While the principle in RFC3935 is explicitly noting that this principle includes a requirement to open 
basically all our documents and documentation and making them accessible over the Internet, it was
probably written with mainly having email interactions in mind when talking about participation.
This document extends this principle to explicitly cover online
participation at meetings. Particularly in this context, openness should be seen as open and free. 

This document does not advise that all IETF meetings or related IETF events must have a remote participation option,
because there could be technical or other reasons why that might not always be possible.
This document rather says that if remote participation is provided,
there should always be a free option to make the process as open as possible. Having said that,

> it is of course strongly anticipated that at least all working group sessions, as well as BoFs
> and the adminstrative plenary of an IETF meeting provide an option for remote participation.

Author: ```suggestion
it is of course strongly anticipated that at least all working group sessions as well as BoFs
and the administrative plenary of an IETF meeting provide an option for remote participation.
```

the registration procedure itself. As long as there are still enough paying participants to cover
the base costs, additional participant can effectively be added without increasing expenses.

> This document is a product of the SHMOO working group and based on the charter work of this group
> it is not in scope for this document to make suggestions for changing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is not in scope for this document to make suggestions for changing
```

I would suggest reverting this - I see no reason why the SHMOO charter needs to be mentioned.

trends in the use of the free participation option that could endanger the viability of the IETF.
Aggregated data on the number and percentage of free registrations used should be published,
as this will permit analysis of the use and change in use over time of the free registration option without
revealing personal information.

As the principle defined in this document aims to promote openness and thereby enhance participation,
an increase in use of free registrations is a success and likely a sign of increased interest and not necessarily a
sign of misuse, as long as the number of paid registrations stays stable and retains
the projected needed income. If the number of paid registrations, however, decreases,
this can still also have various reasons other than misuse,
such as restrictions on travel to physical meetings due to cost savings or environmental reasons, general cost
savings and lesser focus on standardization work, or simply lost of business interest. Such trends

> can impact the sustainability of the IETF option due to its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can impact the sustainability of the IETF due to its
```

> dependency on meetings fees to cross-finance other costs bit are independent of use of the free registrations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
current dependency on meeting revenue, independent of use of the free registrations.
```
